The ETC Mining Difficulty Adjustment Explained (#1113)
ethereumclassic/ethereumclassic.github.io: content/blog/2023-03-15-the-ethereum-classic-mining-difficulty-adjustment-explained/index.md

## The Solution Is the Difficulty Adjustment

![It is difficult to get the cryptographic stamp on target.](./etc-difficulty-banner.png)

The solution to keep the blocks at a steady and stable rate is by adjusting the mining difficulty.

As said before, the hashrate of ETC may grow when machines become more efficient as time passes by, or when miners just buy more machines increasing the computing power dedicated to the network. 

When this happens, blocks may become much faster than 13 seconds. To slow them down again, the network adjusts the difficulty higher so it may take about 13 seconds again, on average, to build blocks.

When hashrate shrinks for any reason, then blocks become too slow. To speed them up, the network adjusts the difficulty lower so it may fine tune the block times back to around 13 seconds, on average. 

## How Proof of Work Works

![Hitting the PoW target.](./1.png)

> The best way to explain the difficulty adjustment is by explaining how proof of work works. It all start with miners receiving and preparing the block data. When they have it together, then they hash the data to create a cryptographic stamp for that information. When they create the stamp, they check if the stamp hit a target imposed by the network. If the target is not hit, which happens the great majority of times, then miners have to go back and re-hash the information, producing a new stamp, that they have to check again. This may happen quadrillions of times per second and this is why there is so much work involved, with so much computing power and electricity usage in PoW mining.

Reviewer: Line 89: Correct typo
```suggestion
The best way to explain the difficulty adjustment is by explaining how proof of work works. It all starts with miners receiving and preparing the block data. When they have it together, then they hash the data to create a cryptographic stamp for that information. When they create the stamp, they check if the stamp hit a target imposed by the network. If the target is not hit, which happens the great majority of times, then miners have to go back and re-hash the information, producing a new stamp, that they have to check again. This may happen quadrillions of times per second and this is why there is so much work involved, with so much computing power and electricity usage in PoW mining.
```

The network is constantly measuring how much time elapses between blocks. When it gets above or below certain parameters, then the difficulty is adjusted higher or lower to get back to the target 13 seconds per block, on average.

This is a more technical explanation given to us by Ethereum Classic core developer, Diego López León, who maintains the ETC instance of the [Hyperledger Besu](https://ethereumclassic.org/blog/2023-01-10-hyperledger-besu-explained) node software client:

1. The mining difficulty in ETC adjusts every block
2. The target block time for ETC is 13 seconds. This means that the network aims to produce a new block every 13 seconds on average. However, the actual block time may vary slightly due to factors such as network congestion and mining variance.
3. The mining difficulty is expressed as a number called the difficulty target. This target is a 256-bit number that represents the maximum value of a valid hash that can be used to mine a block. Miners need to find a hash that is less than or equal to this target in order to create a valid block.

> 4. The difficulty is adjusted using a formula that takes into account the time it took to mine the previous block and the ideal block time of 13 seconds. If the previous block was mined too quickly, the difficulty will decrease, and if it took too long to mine, the difficulty will increase.

Reviewer: Line 106: Rewrite for accuracy
```suggestion
4. The difficulty is adjusted using a formula that takes into account the time it took to mine the previous block and the ideal block time of 13 seconds. If the previous block was mined too quickly, the difficulty is increased, and if it took too long to mine, the difficulty will be decreased.
```
